README.md, before:

💱 Exchange Rates Analytics Pipeline -> Daily Currency Conversion & USD Strength Analysis


📌 Project Overview: 
This project implements a production-style ELT data pipeline for daily exchange rate analysis, designed to showcase modern Data Engineering best practices:

- Containerized infrastructure with Docker
- Orchestration using Apache Airflow
- Data Lake architecture (Bronze / Silver / Gold)
- Incremental and idempotent processing
- Analytical modeling for BI dashboards (Power BI)

The pipeline ingests daily currency exchange rates, processes them through structured layers, and exposes business-ready analytical views for geo-economic insights and USD strength analysis.


💡 Main Idea: Daily analysis of exchange rates and currency conversion against USD, enabling:

- Historical tracking of exchange rates
- Currency appreciation and depreciation analysis
- Volatility analysis
- Geographic exposure (continent & country level)
- SQL-based analytics ready for Power BI consumption


🌍 Data Source: ExchangeRate API
Endpoint: GET https://v6.exchangerate-api.com/v6/API_KEY/latest/USD


🏗️ Architecture Overview

ExchangeRate API
        ↓
[ Bronze ] → MinIO (Raw JSON / Parquet)
        ↓
[ Silver ] → PostgreSQL Data Warehouse (Normalized rates)
        ↓
[ Gold ]   → SQL Views
        ↓
Power BI / Analytics


🧱 Tech Stack

| Layer           | Technology              |
| --------------- | ----------------------- |
| Orchestration   | Apache Airflow          |
| Containers      | Docker & Docker Compose |
| Data Lake       | MinIO (S3-compatible)   |
| Processing      | Python (Pandas, s3fs)   |
| Data Warehouse  | PostgreSQL              |
| Transformations | SQL views        |
| BI              | Microsoft Power BI      |
| Metadata DB     | PostgreSQL (Airflow)    |


🔄 ELT Flow by Layer

🥉 Bronze — Raw Ingestion

Purpose: Extract and store raw data exactly as received.

- Python container calls the ExchangeRate API
- Full API response stored in MinIO
- Timestamp-based idempotency check
- Storage format: Parquet

<img width="2232" height="1119" alt="Captura de pantalla 2026-01-10 173645" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4fd45a50-ef03-4075-9864-afce477383c8" />


🥈 Silver — Structured & Normalized

Purpose: Transform raw data into an analytical format.

- Reads Bronze data from MinIO
- Filters only new exchange rate records
- Unpivots conversion rates using melt
- Loads normalized data into PostgreSQL

<img width="2879" height="1460" alt="Captura de pantalla 2026-01-10 180519" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/77ab92a3-5f41-4fa3-8c6d-9b80bdcd23a6" />


🥇 Gold — Analytical Models (SQL)

Business-oriented SQL views designed for BI consumption. These views act as the semantic layer for analytics, mainly focused on these aspects:

- Currency appreciation & depreciation
- Monthly and yearly volatility
- USD strength by continent
- Latest exchange rate snapshot
- Geo-economic USD exposure

Analytical SQL Views

1. USD Strength by Continent

- Average USD exchange rate
- Volatility by continent
- Currency coverage per region

2. Currency Appreciation / Depreciation

- Daily deltas using window functions
- Identifies appreciating vs depreciating currencies

3. Currency Volatility Analysis

- Monthly volatility (e.g. October / November)
- Full-year performance
- Min / Max / Average values

4. Geo-Economic USD Exposure

- Country and continent exposure
- USD volatility and range movement

5. Latest Exchange Rate Snapshot

- Most recent valid exchange rate per currency
- Cleaned and BI-ready

📊 Microsoft Power BI Integration: PostgreSQL DirectQuery

Visual Tools:

- USD strength by continent
- Currency volatility ranking
- Daily exchange rate trends
- Regional exposure analysis



🧠 Orchestration with Airflow
DAG: exchange_rates_pipeline

- Implemented using DockerOperator
- Fully containerized execution
- Idempotent and restart-safe

Task Flow:    bronze_task → silver_task

| Task        | Description                |
| ----------- | -------------------------- |
| bronze_task | API extraction → MinIO     |
| silver_task | Normalization → PostgreSQL |


📈 Project Impact:

Commit message:

Revise project impact description for clarity
Updated project impact section to emphasize business relevance.

README.md, after:

💱 Exchange Rates Analytics Pipeline -> Daily Currency Conversion & USD Strength Analysis


📌 Project Overview: 
This project implements a production-style ELT data pipeline for daily exchange rate analysis, designed to showcase modern Data Engineering best practices:

- Containerized infrastructure with Docker
- Orchestration using Apache Airflow
- Data Lake architecture (Bronze / Silver / Gold)
- Incremental and idempotent processing
- Analytical modeling for BI dashboards (Power BI)

The pipeline ingests daily currency exchange rates, processes them through structured layers, and exposes business-ready analytical views for geo-economic insights and USD strength analysis.


💡 Main Idea: Daily analysis of exchange rates and currency conversion against USD, enabling:

- Historical tracking of exchange rates
- Currency appreciation and depreciation analysis
- Volatility analysis
- Geographic exposure (continent & country level)
- SQL-based analytics ready for Power BI consumption


🌍 Data Source: ExchangeRate API
Endpoint: GET https://v6.exchangerate-api.com/v6/API_KEY/latest/USD


🏗️ Architecture Overview

ExchangeRate API
        ↓
[ Bronze ] → MinIO (Raw JSON / Parquet)
        ↓
[ Silver ] → PostgreSQL Data Warehouse (Normalized rates)
        ↓
[ Gold ]   → SQL Views
        ↓
Power BI / Analytics


🧱 Tech Stack

| Layer           | Technology              |
| --------------- | ----------------------- |
| Orchestration   | Apache Airflow          |
| Containers      | Docker & Docker Compose |
| Data Lake       | MinIO (S3-compatible)   |
| Processing      | Python (Pandas, s3fs)   |
| Data Warehouse  | PostgreSQL              |
| Transformations | SQL views        |
| BI              | Microsoft Power BI      |
| Metadata DB     | PostgreSQL (Airflow)    |


🔄 ELT Flow by Layer

🥉 Bronze — Raw Ingestion

Purpose: Extract and store raw data exactly as received.

- Python container calls the ExchangeRate API
- Full API response stored in MinIO
- Timestamp-based idempotency check
- Storage format: Parquet

<img width="2232" height="1119" alt="Captura de pantalla 2026-01-10 173645" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4fd45a50-ef03-4075-9864-afce477383c8" />


🥈 Silver — Structured & Normalized

Purpose: Transform raw data into an analytical format.

- Reads Bronze data from MinIO
- Filters only new exchange rate records
- Unpivots conversion rates using melt
- Loads normalized data into PostgreSQL

<img width="2879" height="1460" alt="Captura de pantalla 2026-01-10 180519" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/77ab92a3-5f41-4fa3-8c6d-9b80bdcd23a6" />


🥇 Gold — Analytical Models (SQL)

Business-oriented SQL views designed for BI consumption. These views act as the semantic layer for analytics, mainly focused on these aspects:

- Currency appreciation & depreciation
- Monthly and yearly volatility
- USD strength by continent
- Latest exchange rate snapshot
- Geo-economic USD exposure

Analytical SQL Views

1. USD Strength by Continent

- Average USD exchange rate
- Volatility by continent
- Currency coverage per region

2. Currency Appreciation / Depreciation

- Daily deltas using window functions
- Identifies appreciating vs depreciating currencies

3. Currency Volatility Analysis

- Monthly volatility (e.g. October / November)
- Full-year performance
- Min / Max / Average values

4. Geo-Economic USD Exposure

- Country and continent exposure
- USD volatility and range movement

5. Latest Exchange Rate Snapshot

- Most recent valid exchange rate per currency
- Cleaned and BI-ready

📊 Microsoft Power BI Integration: PostgreSQL DirectQuery

Visual Tools:

- USD strength by continent
- Currency volatility ranking
- Daily exchange rate trends
- Regional exposure analysis


🧠 Orchestration with Airflow
DAG: exchange_rates_pipeline

- Implemented using DockerOperator
- Fully containerized execution
- Idempotent and restart-safe

Task Flow:    bronze_task → silver_task

| Task        | Description                |
| ----------- | -------------------------- |
| bronze_task | API extraction → MinIO     |
| silver_task | Normalization → PostgreSQL |


💼 Project Impact - Business & Investment Relevance:

Accurate and timely exchange rate analysis is critical for investment decisions, risk management, and international exposure assessment. 
By tracking currency appreciation, volatility, and regional USD strength, this pipeline enables investors and analysts to identify macroeconomic trends, hedge currency risk, and evaluate cross-border opportunities using reliable, data-driven insights.
